
From: "Kuivila, Ronald" <rkuivila@wesleyan.edu>
To: Hanns Holger Rutz <rutz@iem.at>
Subject: a couple of paragraphs
Date: Thu, 28 Sep 2017 18:03:56 +0000


Hi Hanns,

Here is some prose about the Weather at Six.
I will follow up with a bit on "discovery" vs. "uncovery".


The term "plausible" refers back to Max Neuhaus and his creation of a permanent public sound work carefully designed to blend with its 
auditory environment.   Such pieces can be contrasted with concerts, where people gather at an appointed time to give their attention to
music, and and with many public art works, which assert presence through some combination of scale and and intervention in the 
normal operations of their sites.  Plausible sounds enact  a "passive aggressive" relation to potential listeners, they lie in wait for
the listener who is ready to observe them and no schedule pertains.  But the margin of attention this exploits extends can also include 
those aspects of experience one has never learned to observe or has learned to ignore or simply does not believe actually exist.  

A carillon is a familiar soundmark now mostly associated with colleges and universities. But it also carries nostalgic overtones of a 
period when bells so strongly defined their communities that, as Alain Corbin has described, they could become sites of political 
contention between church and state. But of course it is the diffusion of easy listening and/or light classical muzak to discourage 
undesirables  from lingering in parks and parking lots that seems closest to the lost power of the bell. And, the anonymous 
carillonneur who sounds those bells out of sight of any listener enacts an "acousmatic" diffusion of sound that is not so different.

The Weather at Six takes an active carillon as its "plausible" sound and creates its electronic doppelganger. On a daily basis over a 
period of months this electronic version plays its mimicry of that carillon becoming increasingly erratic and unfamiliar in sound and 
behavior.  Structuring this piece as a long term transformation slowly stretches the faux carillon from a state of 'plausible' familiarity
to utterly implausible eccentricity.  It is my hope that this will create moments when the listening passers-by are led to change
cognitive categories, to re-consider and re-hear what they have been hearing all along.  That is the moment when an aspect of the 
margin moves to the center, a moment with a certain moral resonance and possibly even a certain moral force.

While the piece was made within a thematic context of climate change, skepticism concerning its human origins and skepticism about 
need for changes in human behavior, it's focus is on human attention and moments of changed belief.  But of course the experience of
that long term effect requires short term attention as well.  Here compositional algorithms refer to long term and short term weather patterns
to shape the sounding music.  Patterns of rain and sun over 100 years or in the few weeks that surround that day.  The slow increase 
in average temperature only becomes discernible when temperatures are averaged over the long term.  That there is no way to 
experience those averages directly may explain why meteorologists remained skeptical far longer the climatologists.  In the context of this
piece, this effect can be heard as a very slow sharpening of the pitch of all the bells in the carillon over each of its daily episodes.
These approaches are not an exercise in data representation so much as a way to allow the weather to give slightly different life to 
each day's sounding.


RJK



